--- 
title: Demo post 
date: 2023-04-06 14:19:20 +0530
categories: [Experimental, First_post]
tags: [random, experimental]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
summary: This is a demo post and the purpose is just to see what can be done (in terms of post) with this jekyll theme. Just ignore this post!
excerpt_card: This is a demo post and the purpose is just to see what can be done (in terms of post) with this jekyll theme.
math: true
---

## 1. Demo post

Hello how are you. Some more changes. Some more changes.
Let us take this improvement to indicate how many times did deployed website shows that --layout errror--
8th April or 15th commit: 2
:3 (writing some more to see if length effects)

```python
import numpy

a = np.ndarray([1,2])
print(a.shape)
```

$$\Large a \ne 2$$

## 2. Random 1

<span style="color: #f2cf4a; font-family: Babas; font-size: 2em;">INSPIRATION DAY</span>

<div style= "font-family: CMS;">
    <p>This text is written in latex font. Humans don’t start their thinking from scratch every second. As you read this essay, you understand each word based on your understanding of previous words. You don’t throw everything away and start thinking from scratch again. Your thoughts have persistence.</p>
    <p>Traditional neural networks can’t do this, and it seems like a major shortcoming. For example, imagine you want to classify what kind of event is happening at every point in a movie. It’s unclear how a traditional neural network could use its reasoning about previous events in the film to inform later ones.</p>
    <p>Recurrent neural networks address this issue. They are networks with loops in them, allowing information to persist.</p>
</div>

<style>
    h2 {
        font-family: CMS;
    }
</style>

<div class="custom" markdown="1" style="font-family: CMS;">

## 3. This is text in CMS

This text is written in CMS font without using html tagging. Humans don’t start their thinking from scratch every second. As you read this essay, you understand each word based on your understanding of previous words. You don’t throw everything away and start thinking from scratch again. Your thoughts have persistence.
Traditional neural networks can’t do this, and it seems like a major shortcoming. For example, imagine you want to classify what kind of event is happening at every point in a movie. It’s unclear how a traditional neural network could use its reasoning about previous events in the film to inform later ones.
Recurrent neural networks address this issue. They are networks with loops in them, allowing information to persist.

</div>

## 4. Random 2

> Hey this is a prompt
{: .prompt-info }

## 5. Collapsing sections

<blockquote>
    <details>
        <summary>Click here to see the implementation details</summary>

        {% comment %}
        You can use font-size or div for box feeling. What that causes issues for responsive website!
        Also don't use heading in hidden blocks, TOC fails to see them. Don't color it as messing in dark mode
        {% endcomment %}

        <ol>
            <b> To Do list </b>
            <ol>
                <li> Hello </li>
                <li> How are you </li>
            </ol>
            <b> Some code </b>
            {% highlight python %}
            import numpy as np
            import pandas as pd

            data = pd.read_csv("filename")
            {% endhighlight %} 
        </ol>

    </details>
</blockquote>

## 6. Chess Game 

| White  | Black  |
|---     |---     |
| 1. e4  | 1. e5  |
| 2. Nf3 | 2. Nc6 |
| 3. Bc4 | 3. Bc5 | 

<iframe id="10408089" allowtransparency="true" frameborder="0" style="width:100%;border:none;" src="//www.chess.com/emboard?id=10408089"></iframe><script>window.addEventListener("message",e=>{e['data']&&"10408089"===e['data']['id']&&document.getElementById(`${e['data']['id']}`)&&(document.getElementById(`${e['data']['id']}`).style.height=`${e['data']['frameHeight']+30}px`)});</script>

## 7. H2 

### 7.1 H3 

This is some random text in h3

#### 7.1.1 H4

### 7.2 H3

## 8. Ending

This is just a demo post to test out features of jekyll
